---
title: Diceware
date: 2022-09-29 00:52 -0500
categories: [Projects]
tags: [python, tutorial]
---

This post will show you how to create a simple Python script that'll create very secure passwords. I will break down each part of the script so that even if it's your first time seeing Python code, you'll understand it (at least I hope).

## What is Diceware?

> Diceware™ is a method for picking passphrases that uses ordinary dice to select words at random from a special list called the Diceware Word List. Each word in the list is preceded by a five digit number. All the digits are between one and six, allowing you to use the outcomes of five dice rolls to select a word from the list.[^1]

Here's what a Diceware word list looks like:

```
...
16655 clause
16656 claw
16661 clay
16662 clean
16663 clear
16664 cleat
16665 cleft
16666 clerk
21111 cliche
21112 click
21113 cliff
21114 climb
21115 clime
21116 cling
21121 clink
21122 clint
21123 clio
21124 clip
21125 clive
21126 cloak
21131 clock
...
```

The complete list contains 7776 unique words. I've posted the one I use on my GitHub. You can download it [here][diceware-word-list].

## Breaking it down

Objective: Create a secure password

1. Roll a die five times to create a five digit number (eg. 52334)
2. Correlate n to the wordlist
3. Profit

## Code

Before we get to the meat of our program we'll define some variables for our functions to reference later on.

```python
import random, re, string, argparse

words = []
punc = string.punctuation
digits = string.digits
```

- random: let's us grab a random number
- re: regular expression
- string: literally so we don't have to type out every single special character
- argparse: so we can call on our script with arguments
- words: empty list so we can append all of our words
- punc: grabs every special character
- digits: grabs every number (0-9)

### Generating our number

Now that that's out of the way, let's start with getting our number. If we were non-computer people we'd simple find some dice lying around the house and roll five times. But we're not, we're ~~gamers~~ _programmers_. To get said number, we'll need to create a loop that'll get us one number, and then rinse and repeat.

```python
def getNum():
    finalNum = ""

    for num in range(5):
        finalNum += str(random.randrange(1,7))

    return finalNum
```

Before we create our loop, we need to create a function to store everything. I named mine **getNum()** but you can name it whatever. We also need a variable that'll store this string of numbers. The empty quotes just means that the variable **_finalNum** is defined as a string and not as an integer. Now for the for loop, **range(5)** allows us to limit this to just, you guessed it, five times. To get our first digit we'll write **str(random.randrange(1,7))**. The **str** defines it as a string so we can add to our variable and **random.randrange(1,7)** grabs a random number from 1-7 **NOT** including 7. For example it goes 1,2,3,4,5,6 ensuring that we only get numbers that would actually be on a die.

### Matching our number to a word

Now that we have our number, let's find out which word we selected.

```python
def getWord(num):
    file = open("diceware.txt", "r")

    for line in file:
        if re.search(num, line):
            wordSplit = line.split("\n")
            wordSplit = wordSplit[0].split("\t")

    return wordSplit[1]
```

We'll call this function **getWord()** which accepts an argument. The **num** argument is going to be the function we created in the [last step](#generating-our-number). For python to see this wordlist, we need to open it with the mode **r** which just means read. This for loop is a little more tricky but I'll try my best to explain it. We'll iterate over the file, line by line, and search for whichever line matches our number. Then we split by the new line character **\n** and then the tab character **\t**.

> There's an invisible new line character at the end. If we don't split by that first it'll show up in our word.
{: .prompt-warning }

Finally we're left with a list that looks like **["num", "word"]**. If we return the first element, remember 0 would equal the num, we get our first word.

### Creating our password

Time for the BIG boy.

```python
def passwd():
    finalPass = ""

    # Gets the argument from the user and calls the getWord func n times
    for i in range(numOfWords):
        words.append(getWord(getNum()))

    # Checks the len of the list of words and rotates between them adding them to the
    # finalPass var at the end
    for w in range(len(words)):
        curWord = words[w]
        getPunc = punc[random.randrange(len(punc))]

        # 50/50 chance of being capitalized
        if random.randrange(2) == 1:
            curWord = curWord.capitalize()

        # If last word then print num instead of punc
        if w == len(words) - 1:
            finalPass += curWord

            # Adds n amount of nums to the end of the passwd
            for n in range(random.randrange(1,5)):
                finalPass += digits[random.randrange(len(digits))]

        # Prints a random punc as the seperator between words
        else:
            finalPass += curWord + getPunc

    return finalPass
```

The main purpose for this function is to generate our password. We'll use it to call on our other functions so we have nice and pretty code. The first loop is just appending **n** amount of words to the **words** list we created back in the [first step](#code).

> The **numOfWords** argument is an integer and we'll discuss it in the [next step](#adding-arguments).
{: .prompt-info }

The second loop looks at the **words** list we just appended to in the first loop.

Example:

```python
words = ['word1', 'word2', 'word3']
```

The loop will iterate over the list and grab the current word aka **curWord**. The **getPunc** variable will essentially do the same thing as our fake dice roll [step](#generating-our-number). The if statement I added is optional but I liked it so I kept it in. It basically emulates a coin toss and will choose at random 1 or 2. If it equals 1 it will capitalize the current word. Finally, our last if/else statement will check if it's on the last word or not. If it's not the last word it'll add the current word plus a random special character to the empty string.

Example:

```
finalPass = ""  ->  finalPass = "word1^"  ->  finalPass = "word1^word2*"
```

Once on the last word, it'll make the if statement true causing it to add the final word, with no special character. I made the for loop add each number one by one because I found if I had set the range to 99999 it would always choose a 4-5 digit number. So the first part just decides how many numbers will be added at the end, max 5, while the next part chooses a random number between 0-9, just like how we chose a random special character.

### Adding arguments

This piece is optional, however, I highly recommended to add it in. Adding arguments to your scripts allows you to not have to set static variables as you'll see in this section.

```python
# Argument parser
parser = argparse.ArgumentParser(description='''
Random password generator based on simulated dice rolls.
''')

# Argument to specify how many words are going to be in the passwd
parser.add_argument('number', help='n words in password', type=int)
numOfWords = vars(parser.parse_args())["number"]

# Calls the passwd func and adds special chars and upper if user answered yes
print("Password = " + passwd())
```

The first block sets up the argument parser and adds in a description.

This is what you'd see if you ran **python dice.py -h**:

```console
usage: dice.py [-h] number

Random password generator based on simulated dice rolls.

positional arguments:
  number      n words in password

optional arguments:
  -h, --help  show this help message and exit
```

The second piece adds in the **numOfWords** variable which only accepts an integer. This will allow you to have a password with one word or five words. It's really up to you. And finally, that last print statement, without the statement the script would just output nothing. That print statement just calls on the **passwd()** function we created in the [last step](#creating-our-password) and outputs it to you, the user.

## Conclusion

So, you just made a script that'll create a secure, and memorable, password. Now you have to go and change all your passwords. I hope you're not reusing the same password for everything. That would be crazyyyyy. If you want a video tutorial, the YouTube channel Computerphile[^2] has a great video going over this topic. If you just want to run the script and not have to worry about all the coding, download it from my GitHub[^3]. I hope you were able to take something out of this or maybe even learn a thing or two. Thank you for checking this out and happy scripting!

#### Links

[^1]: [The Diceware Passphrase Home Page](https://theworld.com/~reinhold/diceware.html)

[^2]: [Diceware & Passwords - Computerphile](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Pe_3cFuSw1E)

[^3]: [Check it out on GitHub!](https://github.com/jamesfloresjr/diceware)

[diceware-word-list]: https://github.com/jamesfloresjr/diceware/blob/main/diceware.txt
